So previously, I have mentioned that we will have
a more in-depth review of a 3D Slicer tool,
and this is exactly what we're going to do in this walkthrough.
So let's take a look at it.
So here, you see a familiar 3D Slicer window.
You might have played with it yourself if you tried installing that.
Let us see how slicer works with images.
So let's click on this "Data" button,
and by the way, you see that there are two buttons here.
There is a data button which allows you to load files and
slicer can load DICOM volumes and NIfTI volumes,
and there is this DCM button,
which allows you to access your own DICOM archive,
or remote DICOM archives,
which are set up as a Clinical Networking endpoints.
For now, let's just load a volume.
We will use a volume which we have seen in the past
when we were going through the convolutions exercise.
This is a volume of a spleen.
So let us load it up.
We see these are our images.
So this is our original axial plane slice.
These are the reconstructed sagittal and coronal.
So let us try and do the volume rendering.
As I have mentioned in the past when we have seen the 3D Slicers,
3D Slicer has all this modules.
So 3D Slicer is modular.
There are things that come with the tool,
there are things that you can develop yourself,
or configure, or download from different places.
One useful module is the volume rendering module.
So let's open that and let's visualize
our 3D volume in this 3D rendering view to the right here.
Let's select volume from the volumes.
Click this little eye icon once it gets loaded.
So you can see that the volume is off to the side here.
So this is where you would use this little cross
here button to center of the volume into the scene.
But before we do that, you can see that there are these buttons here,
like the cubid tells you actually what are you looking at.
The R and the L correspond to right and left side of the patients,
S and I correspond to superior and inferior,
and A and P is anterior and posterior.
So these are the anatomical dimensions that helps you figure out how is the volume
oriented and Slicer knows it
because slicer has analyzed one of those values that we've talked about,
the image orientation patient and others.
So let's look at this volume and let's try to do some window level mapping here.
So we can see it says CT scan.
We can easily focus on the bones.
We can focus on some internal autonomy if we wanted to.
So this is how you would visualize a 3D volume in the slicer tool and play with it.
You can use mouse button to zoom in and zoom out.
So that's it for the 3D bit.
Let's turn this off and let's load a segmentation into slicer.
So let's go here.
Here, let's choose a file to add.
Let's load this other file.
So in this file I have a mask, a segmentation mask,
similar to the ones that you will be dealing with in the final exercise.
Let me load this.
A mask is there,
so it's all gray.
It's hard to figure out what's happening here.
I will go to a data module to see what I'm looking at.
So I can see that I have this spleen label volume.
If I scroll through this mask,
I will see, hopefully, yes.
So on some of the axial slices,
I can see some white space.
Actually, if you look at the left corner here,
this is where the slicer will tell you the value of
the image that's currently under your cursor.
So these are all zeros and this is one.
So we have a binary mask.
So the values that correspond to a ground truth are labeled with ones.
So a convenient thing to do with 3D Slicer when you're dealing with
labels like this with binary mask is converting this volume into a label map.
Let us do that. Let's right-click and let's click the button edit properties and let's go
to volume information and select this Convert to Label Map operation.
So you see that all the black stuff is gone and we have the nice green shape here.
So let us try to select the active volume.
This is how we tell what this labeled map refers to,
and let us visualize some of those slicers on our label in 3D.
Let's switch back to the volume rendering module and let's switch to our label map.
But before we do that,
let's click on this little pin here.
So this pin allows us to do certain interesting things with our slices.
This eye icon actually show slice in 3D.
So let's do that,
and we see this is the 3D volume that we have and this is our slice.
As we scroll, we navigate through different slices.
At this point, let's visualize the volume here.
So this is the volume that we're dealing with and this is what the volume looks like.
So let us go and take a look at the image here,
and try to overlay the label on top of the image.
I'm using this pin icon,
I'm selecting the image here,
and I will click this link thing so
that this is linked with all the other views that I have here.
So now that I have my volume up on the screen,
I will go back to the data module and I will click this little eye icon next to
the label map and this will cause label map to be rendered on top of the image.
So you can see how the label map appears here in the label map selector.
We can see how slicer now visualizes this label map very neatly in the 3D view.
Because we have this eye icon operational,
we can see that we have a visualization of our slice with overlaid label map in 3D.
If we go into the volume rendering module and visualize our label,
we can see how slice is located in relation to this label.
So this label, as you might have guessed,
it tells us where the spleen is located in this volume,
and this is how I would process and make sense of this dataset.
If I can visualize coronal and sagittal slices just in this in the same way,
and actually, let me turn off the link.
I don't want the coronal slice.
I can see how the spleen is located relative to the sagittal slice here.
So let us look at the segmentation procedure.
We'll go into segmentation module and we have
this thing here where we are the drop-down where we don't have any segmentation.
Let's create a new segmentation.
Let's add a segment.
Let's call the segment spleen.
Now, let's go and select this segment,
click "Edit," select it.
Let's set the master volume that the segmentation would be
associated with and let us go and try to segment the volume.
So I remember by looking at the labeled map,
which we just had loaded, where the spleen is located.
So let me try and use the Paint Tool to paint over the spleen segmentation,
and this is one method of doing slicer segmentations.
By the way, there are lots of YouTube videos on slicer.
So if you're wondering how to do certain things in Slicer,
you're just going to go on YouTube and look it up and you will find
people performing all sorts of tests in Slicer.
So we have discussed in the segmentation lesson how segmentation is a tedious process.
So you can witness why it is so because I need to go through every slice and
this volume has rather thin slices and I need to do those segmentations.
Slicer has some productivity improvement features here.
So for example, I can go and do the fill between slices tool.
I started this slice,
and I skip a few slices,
and I will create a segmentation on this slice.
So let me select the Paint tool.
Let me draw the segmentation here,
so I have another segmentation,
and let me fill between slices.
I start at this slice, I scroll.
Don't forget to click Initialize.
I scroll down, and you can see the preview.
So these are the interpolated volumes that have been created for me.
They look okay.
I click "Apply" and the volumes have been created for me.
If I look at this sagittal slice,
I can see how my segmentation starts to shape up.
So I have almost all of my spleen segmented.
So let me go and do another field between slices.
So let me segment the bottom-most slice and let me do the interpolation from here.
I click "Fill between slices," I click "Initialize," I scroll up,
and I click Update."
So I have a spleen segmentation which might not be perfect.
So remember how we talked about inter-observer variability.
So now let's take the spleen segmentation and convert
the spleen segmentation into a binary label map that would be visualized.
So we do the export visible segments into binary label there.
Let's title that.
Let's visualize our binary label map in 3D.
So let's see what it looks like.
Well, it looks okay.
So it looks like I forgot to interpolate those slices.
So this is the point where I would go back and do the painful interpolation here,
but at this point,
I can take this binary label map and I can save it to NIfTI.
So I just quick here, I see Save.
3D slicer can save data in multiple formats.
So I have all the things that I have in my scene.
So these are different label maps on segmentation that I have created.
This is the one that I'm interested in.
I click the drop-down and I look for NIfTI.
This is my NIfTI file down here, and once I select it,
I can click "Save" and it will save NIfTI in a directory of my choice.
So in this demonstration,
we have just seen how you would use 3D slicer to load
the volume and take a look at segmentation associated with this volume,
and analyze the segmentation in three-dimensions.
We have also seen how you would use 3D slicer to segment the volume,
to create segmentation for a volume,
and convert that into a binary mask,
and save that binary mask as a NIfTI file.
So after this demonstration,
we'll have a little exercise where I'm inviting you to try and do this yourself.
Try to load up 3D slicer,
try to load up the spleen volume
which we have used in the previous lesson and in this one,
and try to create a segmentation of the spleen similar to how I just did it.
Then as an extra credit exercise,
try to use the Dice similarity score computation algorithm
which you have implemented in the last lesson
to calculate the Dice score between
your volume and the ground truth that we had in the previous lesson. Good luck.